# Part 39 - Four Places that inspire Emotional Religious Awakening

## 본문

Then the Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha: “Venerable Sir, it was customary for *bhikkhus* who had ended the rains-retreat period in various parts of the land to pay homage to the Bhagavā. We used to have the privilege of meeting and honouring these *bhikkhus* whose presence inspired us. But, Venerable Sir, now that the Bhagavā would be no more, we shall not get the privilege of meeting these inspiring *bhikkhus*.”

In the days of the Buddha, *bhikkhus* went to see the Buddha twice a year, before the rains-retreat period began and at the end of the rains-retreat period. They went to the Buddha before going into rains-retreat to learn the meditation method, and at the end of the rains-retreat period to report to the Buddha their attainments such as *magga-phala*. In Sri Laṅkā also, as in the days of the Buddha, *bhikkhus* used to assemble twice each year, before and after the rains-retreat period. *Bhikkhus*, on the shore on the Mahāgāma side, assembled at the Tissa monastery, which was donated by King Kākavaṇṇatissa while those on yonder shore assembled at Lohapāsāda Pinnacled Hall. Of those two groups, *bhikkhus* on the yonder shore, at the beginning of the rains-retreat period assembled at the Great Monastery (Mahāvihāra), bringing with them brooms and garbage-collecting baskets, where they carried out maintenance works to the Mahācetiya (the Great Shrine) such as, mending the masonry work, white-washing, etc. Before they dispersed to the various places of their choice to pass the rains-retreat period, after having finished their cleaning up operations, they agreed to meet at the end of the rains-retreat period at the Lohapāsāda Pinnacled Hall. At the end of the rains-retreat period, they assembled again at the Lohapāsāda Pinnacled Hall where the Five Collections (*Nikāya*) of the Buddha’s teachings were taught by the *bhikkhu*-elders and recited by the students. Some *bhikkhus* attended the Pāli text sessions while others attended the *Aṭṭhakathā* sessions. Whenever the texts or the *Aṭṭhakathā* were wrongly recited, the teachers would ask the student where (under which teacher) he had learned it, and correct it. The same functions also took place, by *bhikkhus* on the shore on the Mahāgāna side, at the Tissa monastery.

Here the Venerable Ānanda was referring to these biannual functions that were customary during the Buddha’s times.

Venerable Ānanda was careful in the observance of religious and social duties towards fellow-*bhikkhus*. Whenever he saw a *bhikkhu*-elder arrived, he would rose from his seat to welcome him. He would relieve the guest of the umbrella, alms-bowl and great robe and offer a seat to the senior *bhikkhu*. He would then sit down, make obeisance to the *bhikkhu*-elder. And, finding a suitable lodging place for the visitor, he would clean it for occupation. Whenever he saw a *bhikkhu* of senior standing arrived also, he would welcome him, asked about his needs and render every possible help to him. This was because Ānanda was always desirous of being a useful, helpful and respectful *bhikkhu* to every other *bhikkhu*. This was his usual way, and hence he expressed his concern about the matter in the above words.

The Buddha knew how Ānanda was feeling: “Ānanda is concerned about losing the usual privilege of seeing and knowing *bhikkhus* who are inspiring. Now I shall point out to him those places where he can see such *bhikkhus* easily by just staying there himself.”

And He said to him:
