# Chapter 10 - Hemavata Sutta (the story of Sātāgiri Deva and Hemavata Deva)

## 본문

The Buddha delivered the sermon of *Dhammacakka* just before sunset on the full-moon day of the month of Āsāḷha, in the year 103 Mahā Era. At midnight, He taught the Hemavata Sutta (or Sātāgiri Sutta). The reason, in detail, for teaching the said Sutta was as follows:

In this *Bhadda-kappa* with the human life span running into 20,000 years, Buddha Kassapa appeared, and He entered Parinibbāna after living for 16,000 years (which was four-fifths of an *Āyu-kappa*). The cremation of His remains was carried out with great reverence. The corporeal relics of the Buddha did not break up into pieces but remained as a big solid mass of gold. This was the usual happening with all long-lived Buddhas.

As for short-lived Buddhas, they attained Parinibbāna even before many people had the opportunity of seeing Him severally. And so, being considerate and merciful and being desirous that “the many people living in such and such towns and villages should gain merit by worshipping the relics, even after I attain Parinibbāna*”* made a resolution thus: “Let my relics break up to pieces and be scattered.” This being the case, the relics of the short-lived Buddhas, like those of our Buddha, broken into pieces and were scattered like gold dusts.

The people built a large stupa, one *yojana* in height and also one *yojana* in circumference, and enshrined the one and only relic of Buddha Kassapa in it. Each side of it, in one direction measured one *gāvuta* in length and each side had a large entry gate so that the intervening distance between one gate and the next was one *gāvuta*.

King Kilī of Bārāṇasī donated one gate;his son, Prince Pathavindhara, donated another; the officials, led by the army general, donated the third; and the public, led by a rich man, donated the last. The bricks used for building the large stupa were only of gold and precious stones; and each brick was worth a hundred thousand. In building the stupa, realgar was used for cement and fragrant butter oil was used for water.

After the large stupa had thus been built, two friends of good families renounced the world and entered monkhood in the presence of senior disciples who had followed the Buddha in His lifetime. (It is to be noted especially that, in the Dispensation of long-lived Buddhas, only such senior Disciples were qualified to perform novitiation of *sāmaṇeras* and ordination of *bhikkhus* and to give guidance to them. Those who became disciples only after Parinibbāna of the Buddha were not qualified to undertake such tasks.)

Then the said two monk-friends of good family asked the senior disciples: “Sir, what are, in fact, the tasks of monks to be undertaken in the Dispensation of the Buddha?” Thereupon the senior *sāvaka*s addressed them in reply: “Monks, there are in fact two duties for monks to fulfill in the Dispensation of the Buddha, namely, (1) *Vāsā-dhura*, the practice of *Vipassanā-kammaṭṭhāna* (Insight Meditation); and (2) *Pariyattī-dhura*, the learning or teaching of the scriptures. Of these two: (1) the monk of good family stays with his preceptors for five years, attending to their needs, learning and mastering the Code of Conduct (*Pāṭimokkha*) and two or three sections (*bhāṇavaras*) of Suttas and taking proper training in Vipassanā Meditation and also cutting off attachment to his company of fellow monks, as well as to his male and female supporters. And, after entering a big forest, away from people, he practises meditation for the realization of arahatship. This is the monastic duty, the practice of Vipassanā Meditation, called *Vāsā-dhura*. (2) He should, according to his ability, learn and become skilled in one *Nikāya* of the Piṭaka, or two *Nikāyas* of the Piṭaka, or three *Nikāyas* of the Piṭaka, or four *Nikāyas* of the Piṭaka, or five *Nikāyas* of the Piṭaka and should strive for the development of correct and pure *Pariyatti-sāsana* to the letter and the spirit. This duty of the monk, to learn or teach, is called *Pariyatti-dhura*.” Thereupon saying, “Of the two duties that monks should fulfil, *vāsā-dhura* is superior and more praiseworthy,” the two monk friends nevertheless agreed: “We are still young. We should fulfil *vāsā-dhura* only when we grow older. Before we become old, we shall practise for the fulfilment and completion of the duty of learning or teaching of the scriptures called *Pariyatti-dhura*.” Intelligent by nature, they became well-versed in all three Piṭakas within a short period of time and were also very skilled in making decisions on questions of the Vinaya. By virtue of their knowledge of the scriptures, the two monkfriends became renowned in the *sāsana* and they came to have always a large retinue and plenty of gifts and offerings. Each of them had as many as five hundred monk followers.

The two Theras remained giving genuine exhortation (*ovāda*) to the four classes of people who came to their presence. This being the case, the three *Sāsanas* prospered and shone as if the Buddha had reappeared.

### The Dispute between A Dhammavādī Monk and An Adhammavādī Monk

At that time, there lived two monks, a *dhammavādī* (Dhamma Speaker) and *adhammavādī* (Non-Dhamma Speaker), in a monastery near a village. Of the two, the *adhammavādī* monk was cruel and harsh by speech. One day, when the *dhammavādī* monk came to know clearly about the other monk’s offence against some Disciplinary rule (*Vinaya Sikkhāpada*), he rebuked the latter thus: “My friend, your conduct is unbecoming of the *sāsana*!” Thereupon the *adhammavādī* monk, in order to disrupt the original trend of speech, retorted by saying: “My friend, what do you see of me? What do you hear of me? Don't make any rash accusation!” The *dhammavādī* monk replied: “My friend, the noble *Vinayadhara theras*, upholders of the Discipline, will know better.”

The *adhammavādī* monk, thinking: “If the *Vinayadhara theras* are to decide this matter according to the Vinaya, I will certainly have no support to resort to in the *sāsana*,” and he went instantly to the two *Vinayadhara theras*. He approached them with certain requisites as presents in order to beguile and persuade them to favour him. He respectfully made obeisance and offered what he had brought to them and tried to receive their guidance. He pretended to be one who had due respects for them and desirous of staying near them at their service.

One day the *adhammavādī* monk went to the meeting place of the *Vinayadhara theras* and after making obeisance to them remained standing obstinately even though the Theras permitted him to leave. The Theras asked him: “Friend, do you have anything special to tell us?”; and he replied: “Yes, Sirs, there is. I have had a dispute with another monk over a breach of precept. If he, the said complainant (*codaka*) monk, comes to you and reports this matter, please do not decide according to what is deemed suitable.” When the Theras replied: “In the matter that has been brought before the Sangha, it is not fit and proper not to give a decision according to what is deemed right,” he begged them, saying: “Venerable Sirs, if such a decision is made, there will be no support for me to resort to in the *sāsana*. Let this misdeed be my own. (I shall bear its consequences in *saṃsāra*.) Just do not come to a decision in that matter, please!”

Being persistently (and unavoidably) pressed by the *adhammavādī* monk, the *Vinayadhara theras* finally gave in and said: “All right, monk!” After obtaining the consent of the *Vinayadhara theras*, the *adhammavādī* monk went back to the village monastery;and, thinking: “I have done everything I wanted to do with the *Vinayadhara theras*,” he became more domineering, repressive, contemptuous, harsh and adamant in dealing with the *dhammavādī* monk.

The *dhammavādī* monk, thinking: “This *adhammavādī* monk has in fact no fear indeed!” instantly departed from the monastery and went to the thousand monks who were the followers of the *Vinayadhara theras* and addressed them: “Brethren, should not the matter coming up to the Sangha be decided in accordance with the Vinaya rules? Or without allowing the matter to come up to the Sangha, should not the complainant (*codaka*) monk and the accused (*cuditaka*) monk be made to admit their own faults and have their dispute amicably settled? But now, these *Vinayadhara theras* neither decide the matter by themselves nor allow it to be amicably settled by us through their compromise. What does this mean?” On hearing the words of the *dhammavādī* monk and thinking: “There must have been some irregular thing already known to the *Vinayadhara theras*,” the thousand monk-disciples of the *Vinayadhara theras* did not give any reply but remained silent.

Taking advantage of this, the *adhammavādī* monk said in repressive terms: “My friend, you have said previously that the *Vinayadhara theras* would know. Well, you had better report that matter now to them.” He then departed after saying harshly: “From now on, you are totally ruined! Don't you come back to the village monastery where we dwell.”

Thereafter the *dhammavādī* monk went to the *Vinayadhara theras* and bewailed loudly: “Venerable Sirs, thinking, ‘This *adhammavādī* attends to our needs and pleases us,’ you have no consideration for the *sāsana* of the Buddha but have consideration only for an individual; (you have no regard for the *sāsana* but have regard only for an individual;) you give no protection to the *sāsana* but give protection only to a shameless immoral individual (*alajjī dussīla puggala*). Sirs, from today onwards you ought not decide any matter coming under the Vinaya. Only on this day does Buddha Kassapa attain Parinibbāna indeed!” He then departed from the *Vinayadharas*, and wept grumbling: “The *sāsana* of Buddha Kassapa has in fact been irreparably ruined!”

Thereupon the two *Vinayadhara theras* were deeply agitated and became remorseful (*kukkucca*), saying: “Showing regard and giving protection only to the shameless immoral individual, we happened to have thrown away the solid jewel of the *sāsana* into the deep waters of a chasm.” Injured and oppressed in mind and heart by remorse (*kukkucca*), they were not reborn in any higher deva-world upon their death. Of the two *theras*, one was reborn as a *devayakkha* by the name of Hemavata on Mount Hemavata of the Himavanta and the other was reborn also as a *devayakkha* by the name of Sātāgiri on Mount Sata in *Majjhima-Desa* (the Middle Country). The thousand monk followers of these two *theras* were not reborn in any higher celestial abode either. Since they had followed the same practice as that of the two *theras*, they were reborn as followers, 500 to each of the two *devayakkhas*. The donors of the four requisites of the *Vinayadhara theras* were, however, took rebirth on some higher planes of deva existence.

Both Hemavata and Sātāgiri were devas of great power and glory and included in the list of twenty-eight deva generals. It was the custom of the devas to hold meetings to make decisions in judicial proceedings eight times each month at the pavilion called Nāgavatī (or Bhagalavatī, according to Ceylonese version), on the flat realgar rock-surface in the Himavanta Forests. These two *devayakkhas* usually participated in the meetings.

Sātāgiri Deva and Hemavata Deva, seeing each other in the said big meetings of devas and remembering their past lives in the human world, asked each other regarding the place of their (present) existence thus: “Friend, in which place have you been reborn? As for you, friend, what is your place of rebirth?” And they were afflicted with great anguish when recounting their fate: “Friend, we have in fact been irreparably ruined! Even though we had practised the Dhamma of monasticism for the whole period of twenty thousand years during the *sāsana* of Buddha Kassapa in the past, we were reborn as *devayakkhas* because of a shameless immoral and wicked friend. Our donors of the four requisites have, however, been reborn in the higher deva-world of sensual pleasures.”

### The Mutual Promises

Thereafter, Sātāgiri Deva told Hemavata Deva: “My friend Hemavata, the Himavanta where you are living is said to be a marvellous and extraordinary place. So, in case you see and hear anything strange and irregular, kindly come and let me know.” Hemavata Deva also told Sātāgiri Deva: “My friend Sātāgiri, Majjhima Desa, where you are living, the region where noble personages appear or live, is said to be a marvellous and extraordinary country. In case you see and hear anything strange and irregular, please come and inform me.” In this manner the two friends, Sātāgiri Deva and Hemavata Deva, had made a mutual promise and lived without being able to discard their lives as *devayakkhas*; even one *asaṅkhyeyya* of *Buddhantara-kappa* (a vast period of world-system between the appearance of one Buddha and that of another) had passed in the meantime. During this period the great earth had also risen as much as one *yojana* and three *gāvutas*.

At that time, our Bodhisatta had been practising and developing the Ten *Pārāmis* during the whole period of four *asaṅkhyeyyas* and a hundred thousand aeons, from the time he received from Buddha Dīpaṅkarā the Definite Prophecy about his attainment of Buddhahood to the time of his life as King Vessantara. He was then reborn in Tusitā devaworld and lived through the full life span of a deva. At the request made by the devas who had come from the ten thousand world-systems, he gave his assent to them to become a Buddha, after making the Five Great Investigations. He next took conception in the lotuslike womb of Mahāmāyā Devī in this human world, causing the ten thousand worldsystems to tremble while the thirty-two great omens were appearing.

These two friends, Sātāgiri Deva and Hemavata Deva, were aware of the appearance of the thirty-two great omens at the time when the Bodhisatta took conception; but it so happened that they did not take notice of them. They failed to reflect and know: “These great omens appear on account of the Bodhisatta being conceived.” The thirty-two great omens distinctly appeared also on the occasion of the Bodhisatta’s birth, on the occasion of his renunciation of the world and on the occasion of his attainment of Buddhahood. Although they were aware of the appearance of these great omens, they did not ponder and realize: “These great omens appear on account of these events.”

When the Buddha summoned the Pañcavaggī monks and taught the Sermon of Dhammacakka, which is of three phases and twelve aspects, there was the distinct occurrence of a severe earthquake as well as that of the marvellous and extraordinary thirty-two great omens. This was first taken notice of only by Sātāgiri of the two devas, and, knowing that the Buddha was then teaching the Sermon of Dhammacakka, the primary cause of the omens, he went to the presence of the Buddha together with his retinue of five hundred *devayakkhas* and listened to the teaching of Dhammacakka. But he was unable to attain any significant Path and Fruition.

The reason was: Sātāgiri Deva, while listening to the Sermon of Dhammacakka, remembered his friend, Hemavata Deva, and surveyed the audience, wondering: “Has my friend Hemavata Deva come to this Dhamma assembly? Or, has he not come?” Not finding Hemavata, his mind became distracted: “How could my friend Hemavata be so late! He might not be able to listen to the Buddha’s teaching of Dhammacakka, which is so much wonderful and splendid in letter and in spirit!” For this very reason, he was unable to realise any important Path and Fruition.

The Buddha had not yet concluded the teaching of the Sermon of Dhammacakka even by sunset. Thereupon, intending, “I will go and bring my friend Hemavata to listen to the Dhamma-Sermon,” he created vehicles of elephants, horses, garudas, etc. and travelled through the air (in the sky) in the direction where Himavata and his retinue of five hundred *devayakkhas* were.

### The Meeting of The Two Devas in The Sky

Even though the thirty-two great omens appeared on the occasions of the Bodhisatta’s conception, birth, renunciation, attainment of Buddhahood and Parinibbāna, they did not last long but disappeared in a moment. At the time when the Buddha taught the Sermon of Dhammacakka, however, not only the thirty-two great omens were of awesome, marvellous and extraordinary nature but they did not disappear in a moment. In fact, they remained for quite a long time before disappearing. Seeing the marvellous and extraordinary appearance of the thirty-two great omens while inside the Himavanta Forests, Hemavata Deva also intended thus: “Ever since my birth in this forest, this great mountain has never been so marvellously and extraordinarily delightful and perfect. It has so happened now. Therefore, (in accordance with our promise) I will go and bring my friend, Sātāgiri, right away, to luxuriate in these marvellous flowers of the Himavanta Forests.” And, as in the case of Sātāgiri, he also created vehicles of elephants, horses, garudas, etc. and made an aerial journey in the direction of Majjhima Desa, accompanied by his retinue of five hundred *devayakkhas*.

The two devas met each other in the sky above Rājagaha City. When asked by the other as to the reason for his visit, Hemavata said: “My friend, Sātāgiri, ever since I became a deva in the Himavanta Forests, this great Hemavata mountain has never had such delightful appearance with trees blossoming unseasonally. So, I have come to call on you, with the intention of enjoying these marvellous flowers of the Himavanta Forests together with you.”

When Sātāgiri Deva asked Hemavata Deva again: “My friend, Hemavata, do you know why these flowers blossom unseasonally and so marvellously?” the latter replied: “I do not know, my friend, Sātāgiri.” Sātāgiri then told Hemavata: “My friend, Hemavata Deva, this marvellous and extraordinary feature has happened not only in this Himavanta. In fact, the same has happened even (everywhere) in the ten thousand world-systems. My friend, Hemavata, a Buddha has appeared in the three worlds (of devas, humans and Brahmās). The Buddha is at present teaching the Sermon of Dhammacakka in the Dear Park called Isipatana, near Bārāṇasī City. Because of the teaching of the Dhammacakka Sermon by the Buddha, the thirty-two marvellous, unprecedented and extraordinary great omens have distinctly appeared all over the world.”

In this manner Sātāgiri Deva told his friend, Hemavata Deva, that the Buddha had definitely appeared and, being desirous of taking him to the Buddha, he addressed him thus:

On hearing the words of Sātagiri Deva, Hemavata Deva pondered and intended thus: “This Sātāgiri boldly asserts that the personage, whom he has met and seen, is a genuine Omniscient Buddha, saying: ‘Let us even now go and worship the Buddha of Gotama family, who is endowed with undiminishing qualities, who possesses such special epithets as Buddha, Bhagavā, etc.’ (*Anoma nāmaṃ Satthāraṃ*, etc.). Omniscient Buddhas are in fact rare and hardly accessible in the world. Only those persons, such as Pūraṇa Kassapa and others, claimed themselves to be Omniscient Buddhas and ruined many people by imparting wrong knowledge to them. If the monk Gotama, whom Sātāgiri has seen, is a genuine Omniscient Buddha, he ought to be one genuinely endowed with *tādiguṇa*, the quality of being undisturbed or unshaken by the favourable and unfavourable conditions of the world. Therefore, I will first find out whether he is or is not one endowed with *tādiguṇa* which is possessed only by Buddhas.”

And, desiring to question about *tādilakkhaṇa* (Signs of *Tādi*), he recited this verse:

Thereupon Sātāgiri Deva, having been absolutely convinced that the Buddha was certainly a *Sabbaññū* Buddha and being desirous of replying to the questions put by Hemavata Deva regarding the entire set of attributes of the *Sabbaññū* Buddha, answered by reciting this verse:

Thus, when Hemavata put the question, first with regard to *manodvāra* (‘mind-door’ or thought), whether or not the Buddha was fully endowed with *tādiguṇa*, he got the affirmative reply from Sātāgiri. Being desirous of questioning again, in order to be more certain whether or not there was, in the Buddha, purity of the three *dvāras* (‘doors’ or actions) at present, or in other words, after hearing the affirmative reply given by Sātāgiri Deva to the question, first put briefly, whether or not the Buddha was endowed with *tādiguṇa* with regard to the three *dvāras*, and being desirous of questioning again in detail in order to make the answer firmer, Hemavata Deva asked again by reciting this verse:

(The Buddha abstains from *adinnādāna* and other forms of wrongdoing not only in this life of His Buddhahood but also during the whole long period in the past he abstain from these evils. By virtue of His meritorious act of abstinence from such evils is he endowed with such marks of a Great Man (*Mahāpurisa Lakkhaṇas*). The whole world also spoke in praise of the Buddha thus: “Monk Gotama abstains from the crime of theft, etc.”) Hence Sātāgiri Deva, being desirous of replying in clear and bold terms, recited this verse:

After thus hearing the affirmative reply as regards the purity of deeds (*kāya-dvāra*) and being desirous of questioning whether or nor there was purity of speech (*vacī-dvāra*), Hemavata Deva asked by reciting this verse:

(The Buddha abstained from verbal misconduct not only in this life of Buddhahood but also during the whole long period in the past he abstain from telling lies and from other verbal misdeeds. By virtue of His meritorious act of abstinence from misbehaviour in words, he is endowed with such signs of a Great Man as a single hair grown in each pore, the hair between the two eyebrows (*uṇṇaloma*) and others. The whole world also spoke in praise of the Buddha: “Monk Gotama abstains from misconduct such as telling lies,” and so on.) Hence, Sātāgiri Deva, being desirous of replying in clear and bold terms recited this verse:

Hemavata Deva, after hearing the positive reply as regards the purity of speech and being desirous of questioning whether or not the Buddha had, at present, the purity of consciousness; whether or not He had overcome ignorance and whether or not He was endowed with the five eyes, asked by reciting this verse:

(Bearing in mind that, “One is not yet a Buddha merely on account of the purity of the three sense-doors but one becomes a genuine Buddha only if He is endowed with *sabbaññutā-ñāṇa*, Omniscience or the Five Eyes,” he asked: Is He truly one who is endowed with the Eye of Wisdom, penetrating all the Dhammas without any hindrance? (“*Kacci Dhammesu Cakkhumā*?”)

(Even before realising *arahatta-phala* and while still at the moment of His attainment of *anāgāmī-magga*, the Buddha became free from defilement of craving for sensual objects and also free from defilement of ill-will, an unhealthy mental state since He had already discarded *kāma-rāga-kilesa* and *vyāpāda-kilesa*. Even at the moment of His attainment of *sotāpatti-magga*, He was already one who had overcome ignorance since He had already discarded *sacca*-*paṭicchādaka* *moha*, ignorance-covering which conceals the four truths, which is the cause of *micchā-diṭṭhi* (wrong view). He had already earned the title ‘Buddha’ and realised Insight-Knowledge as well, since He had even discerned the Four Truths unaided and with Self-born Knowledge (*sayambhū-ñāṇa*). Hence, Sātāgiri Deva, being desirous of boldly proclaiming the fact that the Buddha possessed purity in respect of His consciousness and having attained Omniscience, was a genuine Buddha, replied by reciting this verse:

In this manner Hemavata Deva was greatly delighted and rejoiced in hearing and knowing that the Buddha possessed purity in respect of the three sense-doors and was a genuine *Sabbaññū-Buddha*. Being himself one endowed with auspiciousness of great learning (*bāhusacca-maṅgala*) in his past life during Buddha Kassapa’s Dispensation and being therefore a fluent, learned and effective speaker with very pure knowledge and wisdom, and desiring again to hear further marvellous and extraordinary qualities of the Buddha, he asked by reciting this verse:

Thereupon, Sātāgiri Deva, since he had profound and decided faith in the Buddha’s genuine Omniscient Buddhahood and a desire to affirm that the Buddha was fully endowed with all the qualities questioned by Hemavata Deva, answered by reciting this verse:

Hemavata Deva then became free from doubt about the Buddha, thinking thus: “The Buddha, whom Sātāgiri has now seen, is a genuine Buddha, Perfectly Self-Enlightened (*Sammāsambuddha*) and supreme in the three worlds.” Even while still remaining in the sky, therefore, he recited this verse in order to praise the Buddha and delight Sātāgiri Deva:

Thereupon, Sātāgiri Deva, also with the intention of gladdening Hemavata Deva once again, recited this verse meaning: “My friend Hemavata, what you have said is perfectly true. Now you, my friend, know the qualities of the Buddha fully well and are greatly delighted:”

And so saying and intending to urge Hemavata Deva to go along with him to the Buddha, Sātāgiri Deva asked by this verse:

Thereupon, Hemavata Deva, as one who had acquired the power of great learning since his previous existence, wished to speak in praise of the qualities of the Buddha which appealed to him and to invite Sātāgiri to go along with him and behold the Buddha. Thus, he recited the following verses:

In this way Hemavata urged Sātāgiri Deva King and the retinue of one thousand *devayakkhas* to go along with him and worship the Buddha and listen to the Sermons.

### Lady Kāḷī became A Sotāpanna

It was the day in which the grand festival of the month of Āsaḷha was being celebrated. At that time, like a divine damsel enjoying divine luxury in the divine city of Tāvatiṃsa, which was adorned with ornaments everywhere, a lady, by the name of Kāḷī, residing in the town of Kuraraghara near Rājagaha City, having gone up to the upper terrace of her parents' mansion and having opened the lion-propped window, was just standing and letting herself to be aired, to ease the pains of her impending labour from pregnancy.

(Lady Kāḷī hailed from Rājagaha City. On coming of age, she was married in Kuraraghara Town. When she was carrying the would-be Soṇakuṭikaṇṇa Thera in her womb, she went back to her parents' home for confinement. She went up to the terrace of the mansion and while having an airing to alleviate her suffering from the coming childbirth, she overheard the attributes of the Buddha being spoken of by the two *devayakkhas*.)

Overhearing the whole conversation between the two *devayakkhas* generals, relating to the attributes of the Buddha, Lady Kāḷī became attentive to them and thought: “The Buddhas are indeed thus endowed with marvellous and extraordinary qualities!” and so thinking she was overwhelmed with joy and delight. Even while standing at that very place in the state of joy, and removing the hindrances by means of that joy, she practised Vipassanā Meditation and thereby realised the Fruition of *Sotāpatti*. Lady Kāḷī, being the first *sotāpanna* and Noble Female Disciple (*ariya-sāvika*) established amongst women was, as it were, the eldest sister of womankind. On that very night, she gave birth to a son (who later on became Soṇakuṭikaṇṇa Thera). After staying in her parents' house for as long as she liked, she returned to her Kuraraghara home.

Thus, without even encountering and beholding the Buddha in the past and just by overhearing, she came to have absolute faith in the attributes of the Buddha and be established in *sotāpatti-phala*,like one who effortlessly takes the meal already prepared and laid out for an individual. On this very account, when the Buddha was later sitting in the midst of the Sangha, holding a convocation to confer titles of pre-eminence to the female devotees (*upāsikās*), He declared: “Dear monks, Lady Kāḷī of Kuraraghara Town is the the most noble and excellent of all my *upāsikās* who have absolute faith in the Triple Gem just by overhearing!” and designated her foremost among those having faith by overhearing (*Anussava-pasāda*).

### The Two Deva Generals went to The Buddha

Sātāgiri Deva and Hemavata Deva, accompanied by their one thousand *devayakkhas* followers, reached the Deer Park at Isipatana in Bārāṇasī City at that very midnight. And, approaching and making obeisance to the Buddha, who had not changed His posture but who was still sitting cross-legged as He did at the time when He taught the Sermon of *Dhammacakka*, they recited this verse to extol the Buddha and to request permission to question Him:

After asking for permission, Hemavata Deva, who has greater power and wisdom between the two, questioned on what were unknown to him, by reciting the following verse:

Thereupon the Buddha, intending to answer the question put by Hemavata Deva on the strength of the six *ajjhattikāyatanas* (internal organs of sense, namely, eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and mind) and of the six *bāhirāyatanas* (external objects of sense, namely, form, sound, smell, taste, contact and idea formed in the mind), replied (by reciting this verse):

*End of Question and Answer on vatta (round of suffering*)

Thereafter Hemavata Deva, being unable to remember clearly the answer given in brief by the Buddha (such as *Chasu loko samuppanno*, etc.), which centres around the twelve *āyatanas*, to the question put by him on the round of suffering, and being desirous of knowing the enumeration of the *āyatanas* as well as their opposites, as contained in the

Buddha’s answer, recited the following verse in order to question on *vaṭṭa* and *vivaṭṭa*

(round of suffering and cessation of the round of suffering, respectively):

When Hemavata Deva asked the Four Noble Truths, mentioning *Dukkha-sacca* and *Magga-sacca* explicitly, and *Samudaya-sacca* and *Nirodha-sacca* implicitly, the Buddha delivered the following verse in order to answer in the way He was asked by Hemavata Deva:

The Buddha thus showed the excellent Wayout (*Niyyāna*), which is the Eightfold Path as a means of escape from *saṃsāra vatta*. And again, as He desired to conclude His answer on the *Niyyāna* *Dhamma* in the ‘Natural language’, He recited the following verse:

### The Devayakkhas became established as Sotāpannas

In this manner, the Buddha concluded the Dhamma Sermon perfectly well that was building up with *arahatta-phala* as its pinnacle. At the end of this Sermon, the two devas, Sātāgiri and Hemavata, became established in the *sotāpatti-phala* along with their retinue of a thousand *devayakkhas*. (That is to say, they all became *sotāpanna-ariyas*, ‘Noble Streamenterers’.)

*End of the Question and Answer on vaṭṭa (round of suffering) and vivaṭṭa (cessation of round of suffering*)

Thereafter Hemavata Deva, being one who had, by nature, due respect and devotion for the Dhamma and being now established as a noble *sotāpanna*, was not content with the Buddha’s wonderful Dhamma which was perfect in letter and in spirit. Therefore, desirous of knowing the two causes, namely, *Sekkha-bhūmi* *dhamma* (the cause of becoming lower *ariyas*) and *Asekkha-bhūmi* *dhamma* (the cause of becoming *arahats*), he addressed the Buddha by reciting the following verse:

Thereupon the Buddha recited the following verse as He desired to answer on *sekkhabhūmi* put in the first half of the questioning verse:

After the Buddha had thus given the answer on of *sekkha-bhūmi*, He now recited the following verse in order to give an answer on *asekkha-bhūmi*:

*End of Question and Answer on Sekkhabhūmi and Asekkhabhūmi *

### The Two Devayakkhas singing Eulogies.

Thereafter Hemavata Deva eyed his friend Sātāgiri Deva as well as the retinue of the thousand *devayakkhas* with delight and satisfaction, and sang the following five verses eulogizing the Buddha. Along with his friend Sātāgiri Deva and the retinue of the thousand *devayakkhas*, he make obeisance to the Buddha with due respect and devotion and returned home.

The five verses of eulogy and veneration were:
