# Part 3 - Visukamma Deva created an Auspicious Royal Lake for the Prince

## 본문

In this manner, when the Prince reached the age of seven, having grown up happily amidst the luxury like that of devas, King Suddhodāna one day asked his ministers: “O men, what kind of sport pleases the children of tender age?” When the ministers informed him: “Your Majesty, young children like to play in the water,” King Suddhodāna sent for artisans and ordered them to select a suitable site to dig a magnificent royal take.

Thereupon, Sakka, the deva king, becoming aware through reflection that steps were underway to select a lake-site, thought to himself: “It is not proper at all for the Bodhisatta to use a lake built by human beings; only the lake created by devas will be appropriate for him.” He summoned Visukamma Deva and assigned him the task of digging a lake, saying: “Go now, to the human abode, O deva, and create a suitable lake for the Bodhisatta to play about.” To the question: “What kind of lake would you like me to create?” Sakka replied thus: “The lake that you will create should be free of mud and slime; its bed should be strewn with rubies, pearls and corals; it should be surrounded by walls made of seven kinds of precious stones. The descending steps leading into the lake should be made with planks of gold, silver, and rubies; the hand-rails should be of rubies and the main balusters supporting the rails should have their tops encrusted with corals. Inside that celestial lake, for the Bodhisatta to play water-throwing, you should create a golden boat equipped with a silver throne, a silver boat with a golden throne, a ruby boat with a coral throne and a coral boat with a ruby throne. They should also be furnished with golden bowls, silver bowls, ruby bowls and coral bowls for water-throwing. The said lake should be beautifully covered and graced with five kinds of lotus.”

Visukamma Deva, after giving assent, descended to the human abode that very night and created a lake, complete in all details of the Sakka’s instruction, on the site chosen by King Suddhodāna. (Here, it may be questioned as to how the five kinds of lotus could grow and blossom in the lake which was devoid of mud. The answer is as follows: Visukamma Deva created small golden boats, silver boats, ruby boats and coral boats in such and such places in the said mud-free lake and made the solemn wish: “Let these small boats be filled with slime and thick mud and let five kinds of lotus grow and bloom in these mud-filled boats.” Thus created and resolved by Visukamma Deva, five kinds of lotus thrived and bloomed in the royal lake.) The pollen from the lotus flowers spread over the surface of the lake moving with the gentle breeze and rippling waves. Five species of bees in five different colours buzzed and droned merrily as they bustled from flower to flower. In this manner, Visukamma Deva created the royal lake as instructed by Sakka and returned to the celestial abode.

When the new day dawned, thousands of citizens saw the awe-inspiring magnificent lake, they exclaimed joyously: “Surely, this lake must have been created by Sakka and devas for the Prince!” And so, with joy and delight, they went and reported the matter to King Suddhodāna. King Suddhodāna, accompanied by a vast retinue, went to see the lakes. When he saw the magnificence and splendour of the lake, he exclaimed with delight: “This lake verily is the creation of divine beings because of the power and glory of my son!”

Thereafter, the Prince went to play in the water of the lake which was a requisite for celestial pleasures. (These are the words quoted from the exposition of the Sukhumāla Sutta, Devadūta Vagga, Tikanipāta, Aṅguttara Commentary, Volume II.)
