# Part 6 - Contemplation of the Dhamma

## 본문

The yogi who wishes to contemplate the Dhamma should commit to memory the six attributes of the Dhamma in Pāli and translation as given above. He should recite each of them at a speed neither too slowly nor too fast, reflecting on its meaning. One who reflects on the attributes of the Dhamma, while doing so, prevents the arising of thoughts of lust, hatred and bewilderment, besides gaining concentration which clears the mind of lethargy and distraction, and rendering it possible for a righteous thought-process to arise through the medium attitude of mental exercise, i.e. equanimity.

As the concentration gets stronger through this meditation practice, the hindrances fall off and consequently the defilements are quelled. The Five Faculties, such as conviction, become very pure and effective. The repeated reflection on the Dhamma sharpens the initial application of the mind and sustained application of the mind. When these two factors are functioning well, delightful satisfaction arises. Due to the delightful satisfaction, serenity of mental concomitants and serenity of mind arise, as the result of which, physical and mental uneasiness are stilled. When there is serenity of mind and serenity of mental concomitants, happiness that causes the arising of concentration becomes pronounced. The thought-process being enriched by happiness is firmly fixed on the object of meditation. (i.e. the Dhamma.)

Thus the factors involved in meditation beginning from initial application of the mind become more and more efficient stage by stage. The mind is neither lethargic nor distracted so that the medium attitude of meditative practice is maintained and the Five Faculties, such as conviction, are functioning in harmony. The five factors of *jhāna*, namely, initial application of the mind, sustained application of the mind, delightful satisfaction, happiness and one-pointedness of mind, arise simultaneously at every thought-moment with the great meritorious consciousness of the Contemplation of the Dhamma which is mental cultivation pertaining to the Sensuous Sphere. Thus, neighbourhood concentration or threshold concentration, *upacāra-jhāna*, is achieved. When this concentration arises together with the great meritorious consciousness of the contemplation of the Dhamma, which is mental cultivation pertaining to the Sensuous Sphere, the yogi is called one who has achieved *upacāra-jhāna* of the contemplation of the Dhamma.

(The possible questions relating to *upacāra-jhāna* and their answers should be treated along the same lines as in the case of contemplation on the Buddha.)

### Benefits of Contemplating The Dhamma

A yogi, who contemplates the Dhamma repeatedly, is imbued with the intrinsic value of the Dhamma, in its being worthy of constant companionship so much so that he feels a deep sense of awe and gratitude towards the Buddha, the fount of the Dhamma. For, never was this Dhamma propounded by any other teacher. Thus, through the habitual contemplation of the Dhamma, one naturally becomes devoted to the Buddha, exceeding other person’s devotion. Therefore, his devotion to the Buddha is comparable to that of the *ariya*. He gains a stable mindfulness, a profound wisdom, and much merit. He becomes possessed of much delightful satisfaction, first of the feeble kind but later, of an ecstatic kind. He becomes indifferent to fearful things, great or small. He becomes tolerant to pain. He feels that he is in the company of the Dhamma. The body of one whose mind is steeped in the Dhamma is like a shrine worth paying homage. His mind is always inclined to and desirous of attaining the nine Supramundane factors. Being constantly aware of the attributes of the Dhamma, he is incapable of allowing himself to commit evil, through shame and dread to do it, whenever occasion for it arises. Contemplation of the Dhamma is a sure basis for gaining *magga-phala*. If the yogi does not attain *magga-phala* in this existence for want of sufficient past merit, he is reborn in the fortunate existences. These are the benefits of contemplating the Dhamma.
