# Cūḷaseṭṭhi Jātaka

## 본문

*Prologue*: Having gone back to the monastery after partaking of the food, a discussion took place at a meeting of the monks thus: “Supreme indeed are Buddhas. He could cause a monk, who failed to learn by heart a single verse in four months, to become such a powerful one!” Knowing the minds of the monks, the Buddha came to the meeting and sat on the Buddha’s seat. Then He asked: “Monks, what are you talking about?” When the monks replied: “Exalted Buddha, we were talking about nothing but Your grace. We were talking that Cūḷapanthaka has received a big favour from You!” The Buddha said: “Monks, receiving supramundane inheritance now by following My advice is not wonderful enough. While he was of immature wisdom long long ago in the past, Cūḷapanthaka received mundane inheritance by taking My advice.” “When was it, Exalted Buddha?” asked the monks. And at their request the Buddha related the Cūḷaseṭṭhi Jātaka to the monks in the following manner:

Monks, once upon a time, King Brahmadatta was ruling over the city of Bārāṇasī. At that time, a wise merchant, known as Cūḷaseṭṭhi, was an expert in reading all omens. One day, on his way to the palace to wait upon the King, he saw a dead rat and, on observing and reflecting at that time on the planets in the sky, and read the omen thus: “Any intelligent man, who takes the dead rat, will be able to maintain his family and to do business.” An unknown poor man, hearing the wise merchant’s reading of the omen and being aware that this wise merchant would not say so without knowing it, picked the dead rat, went to the market and sold it as cat’s food and received a coin. With that coin, he bought some molasses and carried a pot of drinking water. Seeing some flower sellers, who had come back from the forest after collecting flowers, he gave a little portion of molasses and a cup of clean water to each of them for their refreshment. Out of gratitude, each flower seller gave a handful of flowers to the poor man.

(From this point onwards, the poor man will be referred to as the 'talented pupil' partly because he was of talent mind and partly because he was a pupil receiving the instruction given by the wise merchant Cūḷaseṭṭhi.) With the cost of those handfuls of flowers, he bought molasses as much as the flower money could buy and went to a park carrying the molasses and a pot of clean drinking water. On that day, the flowers-sellers equally shared their flowers with him and departed. In this way, the talented pupil had soon saved eight silver coins.

Again, on a stormy day, the talented pupil went to the big old deserted garden and while he was making piles of branches, which were broken and cut down by the strong winds, for firewood, he received sixteen coins from the royal potter. With the eight coins accrued from the flowers, he now had twenty-four coins, and thought to himself: “I have some good means of obtaining money, by making myself a water-donor to the grass-cutters. Having thought thus, he set up a water jar at a place neither too near nor too far from the city-gate. Then he gave the drinking water free to the five hundred grass-cutters who came from the outskirts of the city. The grass-cutters said to him: “Friend, you have done a great service to us. What can we do for you?” The talented pupil replied: “When some occasion arises, you may help me.” After saying such words of acceptance, he wandered about and made friends with the official of highways and the official of waterways.

One day, the highway official brought him the good news that a horse merchant would visit Bārāṇasī City with five hundred horses. Getting the news, the talented pupil transmitted it to the grass-cutters and asked them each to bring an extra bundle of grass to what they had brought in the previous days. When the time for the entry of the horses came, the talented pupil piled up the thousand bundles of grass near the inner doors of the city so that the grass was visible to the horse-merchant, after which he sat down. The horse merchant could not get the fodder though he roamed about the whole city in search of it. So he gave a thousand coins to the talented pupil and took away the thousand bundles of grass.

Two or three days later, his [other] friend, the waterway official had the information sent to him that a big cargo boat had been moored inside the harbour. So he thought to himself: “Some means of earning money has come up again!” Then he hired a fully furnished chariot for eight coins of silver and went in it to the sea-port. He gave a ring to the captain of the boat as an advanced payment. At a place near the port, he had a curtain properly hung, as though it was a house of brokerage. Sitting there, he ordered his employees saying: “If other merchants come to me, tell me by way of three stages. (There should be three places which the information must pass through.)”

Hearing of the arrival of the cargo-boat, merchants numbering a hundred, rushed from the city of Bārāṇasī to the port with an idea to buy the merchandise. The employees of the talented pupil who were there before the other merchants came, readily said to them: “You will not get the goods, for the merchant sitting in such and such a place has made an advanced payment for the whole lot of goods.” On hearing these words, the hundred merchants of Bārāṇasī came to the talented pupil (the so-called great merchant).

The servants of the talented pupils respectfully informed him of the visit of the merchants, passing through the three stages, as they had been told beforehand, just to aggrandize the matter. Each of the hundred merchants gave him a thousand coins as gift money to become shareholders in the business. Again each of them offered another thousand coins to him as a profit by which way they (made him resign as a shareholder and) managed to possess the whole lot of goods on the boat as their monopoly. The talented pupil earned two hundred thousand in one sitting and brought the money to Bārāṇasī and thinking: “I should do something out of gratitude.” He took a hundred thousand coins and went to the wise merchant Cūḷaseṭṭhi.

Then the wise merchant asked the talented pupil: “Dear son, how did you get such a lot of money?” The talented pupil related the whole story, saying: “Following the advice you gave on seeing the dead rat, I have become rich by two hundred thousand and twenty-four coins.” The wise merchant then considered: “A young man of such a talent should not belong to others; he should be mine.” So he gave him his daughter, who had come of age, in marriage and helped him become head of the household. Upon the death of the wise merchant, he was given the rank of that merchant and lived according to his life span and was reborn as determined by his deeds.

Having related both the present story and the past, the Buddha spoke words regarding the two events and uttered the following verse for the present life:

In this way the Buddha delivered this life-story to the monks in the Dhamma assembly.
